The Big Way Out

"Get out," Darby's dad said.

Following those two words, Darby expected her dad to fly into blistering criticisms. He didn't. And, she lost any desire to toss in a few rehearsed zingers. Instead, she wanted to cry. I guess I deserve this.

"Right now," her dad said, pointing at her belongings piled on the hardwood floor, and then to the front door. "Take the car. I'll pick it up tomorrow."

Although she had expected to be kicked out, she had hoped she could keep the car. No college, no job, no home, no car, no money.

"I'm sorry," she blurted.

He narrowed his eyes, which Darby couldn't differentiate between anger and pain, walked around the pile and opened the front door.

"I'm sorry," she repeated. She bent over and picked up a handbag, slung it atop her left shoulder, and took hold of a suitcase handle in her right. She wheeled it to the door, looked up at her dad, and crossed the threshold into cool, foggy morning air.

Darby pulled the suitcase to her little white Nexon. The hatchback opened when she approached, and she fed the suitcase to the loading arm which drew it into the cargo area. She tossed the handbag in, and the arm repositioned the bag against the suitcase. She walked towards the front door and crossed paths with her dad, who looked at the ground while lugging a stack of milk crates. She took the two remaining suitcases from the foyer and rolled them to the car, which the loading arm packed and secured.

They stood behind the Nexon, staring at each other. What's left to say? Darby wondered. He remained silent.

"Well," she began. Money? Affection? Goodbye? Anything. He offered nothing further, so she walked past him and blinked away tears gathering in her eyes. The passenger canopy slid open and she stepped inside, reclining into the plush bench seat.

As she stared ahead, she thought, Now what?

Her dad walked alongside the vehicle, approached the open canopy, and pointed at the center screen. "Check your status."

Darby pressed her lips together and double-tapped her left temple to engage her augmented reality. The familiar rings interface appeared, an interactive Venn diagram of her life, and immediately she saw the most recent change. The epicenter she had known her entire life, depicting her innermost circle, had shrunk to a single entity. Once it encompassed her father and her, closely aligning with her father's own circles, and now it only included her. The virtual change, more than the physical act, cemented her departure.

A question flared suspended beyond the windshield. Do you need a home?

She risked another glance at her dad, who stood with his arms crossed and a stern expression.

"Yes," she whispered.

The rings shifted and an old friend, Veronique, whom she hadn't spoken with since sophomore year, slid closer to her inner circle.

"A temporary residence has been identified."

She raised her hand, fingers aimed at the hologram, and quickly pushed it away. Someone else, she thought. It slid back in place.

"Okay," she said aloud. "I'm going now."

Her dad walked into the house and watched from the doorway.

The canopy closed, the car backed into the street, and began driving to Veronique's home. She wondered where Veronique lived. Apartment? House? Dormitory? As the Nexon merged through vehicle caravans and began commuting downtown, Darby gazed into the fog and cried.

The Nexon steered into the drive of an upscale apartment building. The canopy opened and the autopilot spoke in an androgynous voice, "Your purchases will be unloaded in the butler and delivered to your room."

She climbed out of the vehicle and walked up a short flight of stairs to the double doors leading to the apartment. She tried to open the door, found it locked, and waved her right hand near an animated palm silhouette. Yellow lettering flashed in the glass: Visitor Access - Proceed to 1207. The door opened, and Darby walked across the subway-tiled entry to a pair of elevators. She stepped into a waiting car and ascended to the twelfth floor.

Red and gold industrial carpet covered the twelfth floor hallway, illuminated by indirect LEDs in dated wall sconces. A yellow light pulsed on the wall opposite of the elevator and began moving to Darby's left. She followed it to an illuminated doorway. Darby touched the palm silhouette and the door opened.

Veronique waited with a wide smile and beckoned Darby inside.

"Come in, come in," she said. "This is so exciting. You must be excited! It's your big moving day!"

"Yeah," Darby said and tried a smile. "I guess."

"I know it's disorientating at first, but you'll be settled quickly."

Darby glanced around the entryway to the apartment. It was small, and behind Veronique she saw floor to ceiling windows revealing a picturesque cityscape. "This looks nice."

"I think so," Veronique said. "I mean, it's small, but once I got into grad school my allowance rating let me move here."

Veronique led Darby to the kitchen, pointed at the refrigerator. "Go ahead and help yourself if you're hungry. I need to check on something." Veronique turned and walked from the kitchen to the living room.

Darby opened the refrigerator door and was surprised to see fully stocked shelves. "You could feed an army," she said.

"A la carte," Veronique said from across the room.

Darby reached for a can of sparkling water. As her fingers neared the aluminum cylinder, her AR attached a virtual price tag: 4.50. She closed the door.
