Harlot's Eight

Chapter 1


Simon Stewart walked to the comptroller’s desk, picked up a quill, and signed his name in the ledger.  He scrutinized Mr. MacWhisk tallying pieces of eight on a haphazard stack.  Considering the gold leaf gilded to the spine of each coin, he thought, Gone to tax and baby.
Baby.  He didn’t want to believe that Ceccarny had gotten pregnant after their one romantic interlude.  But, she had.  And, everyone he told responded with guffaws and chuckles.  Why was it so funny? 
The last piece of eight dangled from age-spotted fingers.  "I’m still waiting for that mineral separation spell, Stewart."
"It will be finished this afternoon."
MacWhisk tossed the coin across the desk. "I knew you were up to the challenge."
Simon dropped his hand and fenced the coin from sliding onto the floor.  He counted the money, depositing the coins into his purse. "I didn’t get the promotion.  The director said my work showed a lack of fundamental magic theory."  Because I’m not a fairy.  "Sometimes I think you have to be unreal to get ahead around here."
MacWhisk reached across the desk and took hold of Simon’s hand. "You are a skilled sorcerer.  But, the crown wants everyone to use the imperial spell casting method, and all sanctioned businesses, including this factory, are obliged to acquiesce.
"It’s my fault, Simon.  I shouldn’t have encouraged you all these years to use the undead method."  He retracted his hand and touched the money box.  "You’re not the only one affected.  I was reassigned as comptroller for the same reason you weren’t promoted."
A knock rattled the office door.  Simon glimpsed an employee standing outside, leather pouch in hand.
"Thanks, Mr. MacWhisk."  He walked out of the office and brushed past the waiting employee’s translucent wings.
Simon continued down the hallway and descended a flight of stairs.  He crossed the factory floor, passing carts laden with ore and stepping over cart rails.  Spaced across the factory were workbenches occupied by humans and fairies, and as he passed Simon studied their work.  Near the middle of the factory, he rounded an iron cart heaped with fist-sized rocks and gave a wide berth to his fairy benchmate.
Trussing his wings, Braevarn said, "That was fast.  Did you skip paying your taxes again?"
Simon roosted on a stool beside his half of the workbench and tossed the purse onto a stack of yellow parchment. "I didn’t want to wait in line.  I’ll pay it tomorrow."
He reached into a bouquet of quills blooming from a stone well and picked one from the middle.  The orange and drab pattern caught his attention and he passed the quill to Braevarn.  "Is this your cockatrice?"
 "No.  Supply stopped by and restocked our station. Give me a moment to finish this spell." Braevarn tweezed a mossy reagent from a glass jar and meted tufts on a scale bason; copper wafers weighted the counter bason. 
Simon dropped the unreal feather across a heap of sorcery materials.  Useless.  He took another quill, a feather once belonging to a real bird, and dipped it in ink.  Nib poised over an incomplete formula, he paused to study Braevarn’s spellcasting.
Braevarn dusted a pile of rock with magnesium powder, sprinkled chopped vegetable matter, added the moss, and measured two drops of hemp tincture.  Arcs of blue and red energy rippled over his left hand.  Words formed on his lips and a colorful yarn of energy leapt from his hand to the rocks.  Sparks coruscated over the pile, fading into white ash and burnt plant coals.
Braevarn blew the ash from the stone, unveiling beads of molten silver.  He smiled.  "You might have a better chance during the next promotion cycle if you start using the imperial method now."
Simon pinched the quill shaft.  "Why?  I can do the same thing with a compass and a pen."  Peevish, he knew, but he let the words slip. 
Braevarn twisted his torso and propped his right elbow on the workbench.  "And Visella to help you with the esoteric math, and almanacs of seal coordinates, and a statlass to measure the channel strength.  That is a lot of extra work that can be avoided with spell reagents."
Simon flicked the feather toward the pile of unused spell ingredients. "These shroud the science in religion and mysticism.  We don’t -"
Iron clanked on the lower level and the floor vibrated.  Derailment, he thought.
"Simon," Braevarn hissed.  "The imperial method is a royal mandate.  If you keep up with the undead channeling method, you won’t get promoted, you could get fired, and you might even get arrested.  Don’t you have a baby to think about?"
Simon mouthed "But," and swallowed the sound.  Bile rose in disagreement.  Ceccarny and the baby were more important than an ideological difference.  Did it matter how the spell was crafted, or which lexicon was used?  Was it worth being arrested over a word?
Yes! Except, and he reasoned standing by controversial ideals would be irresponsible with a baby on the way.
Braevarn’s thin lips curled upwards and across his triangular face.
"Alright, why does everyone think it is so funny when the baby is brought up?"
Braevarn smirked and began collecting the beads of silver with a small knife.  
Simon felt another vibration roll through the floor and watched sundries quiver on the workbench; rock chips danced across an open parchment, the compass needle rocked a quarter turn, and the four statlass needles lapped the metered rose. He heard a brassy resonance from rocks settling in the nearby iron cart.
"What is that?" Simon stood, walked between several workbenches and peered through the window.  
Looking east, the ore conveyor stretched from the hazy crater depths to the lower level in the factory.  Wind whipped dust off the conveyed rocks and the lift swayed near the building.  
He pointed at the window corner.  "I think part of the rigging gave out.  The lift is shaking."
Braevarn stood and called across the workstations, "Is it the western shaft?"
Simon looked south towards the gondola station where a metal cage, packed with human and fairy mine workers, descended from the crater edge.  He pushed greasy brown curls high on his forehead and scanned the gondola cables for signs of distress.
"They’re still sending people down, and the gondola isn’t swaying."  He waited, gazing east where the crater depths became a notch on the horizon.  Then, he walked to his workbench. 
Enough with the distractions.  Simon glanced at the clock.  Two more hours.  Tonight, I’ll ask Ceccarny.  But, there was no excitement in the thought. He was disappointed at Ceccarny’s aloof behavior since their one night of passion, and he regretted the outcome.  Reflecting on Braevarn’s reaction, he thought, Why does everyone think the baby is so funny?  I’m trying to do the right thing.
Simon wet the quill in ink and completed a set of figures.  He set the quill in the ink well, and picked up the wood-bodied compass in his right hand and the ceramic statlass in his left.  He inhaled, held his breath, and rotated the compass to align with a direction scrawled on the parchment.  
Simon pointed his left index finger and waited for the calculated lead time.   He tapped his left foot, feeling the scrape of leather sole on dirty wood, and counted.  Thirty seconds.
Braevarn picked up the cockatrice quill from Simon’s pile of sorcery supplies and spun the feather.
 "Don’t." Simon exhaled and continued his count.  And twenty six, and twenty seven.  Three more seconds and he would have an open channel to a fire seal; a source of elemental magic. 
Braevarn pointed the tip of the feather at Simon’s arm.  "Don’t burn yourself."
Simon’s index finger tingled; the channel burgeoned and needed an opposing force.  He thought about the nearby water seal and recalled the unique feeling of its energy and position.  Because recent use left him orientated to the nearby seal’s energies, he didn’t have to touch or see the seal, or calculate a path to its energy. The water seal channel opened to his thumb within a second of the fire seal channel striking his index finger.  Both channels were hot and abrasive. 
He studied the four statlass needles; two were motionless, and two oscillated.  Using the statlass to keep both channels in balance, Simon increased the amperage.  A tongue of energy arced from his thumb to his index finger and slithered across the back of his hand.
Simon set the compass and statlass on the workbench and picked up the quill.  As the nib touched the parchment, an airy sensation brushed his right arm. 
He glared at Braevarn.  "I still have to open channels to life and death seals."
"I know." Braevarn swept the feather from workbench to ceiling.  "The pixies are back."
Right.  He looked to where Braevarn pointed.  No!
An infestation of pixies fluttered from the rafters and swarmed atop the workbench.  The two-inch pixies set to chewing the parchment corners and raising a ruckus in the mortar of hemp tincture.  
Simon balled his left fist, channel energy pulsing across his knuckles, and shocked the pixies away from the parchment.  "I thought they sprayed for these."
Braevarn stood and flapped his pastel and transluscent wings, knocking pixies from his sleeves and back.  "Something is driving them inside."
A pixie wearing a single dragon scale for a loin cloth dipped its feet in the inkwell and stamped across the parchment.  A shrill exclamation of glee precipitated the pixie ruining Simon’s formula.
Simon rose and threw the quill at the pixie.
The pixie sprung into the air. Seconds later, all of the pixies across the factory took flight and swarmed to the ceiling.
"Sand ray!"  MacWhisk ran between carts and workbenches, bulbous gut heaving as he sucked air.
At the north side of the factory, the foreman knelled the alarm bell.  "Drop your spells!  Evacuate!"
Simon heard a crash, looked: a smashed window and a cluck of fairies flying over the crater. Turning around, he didn’t see anyone else make it through the foyer; the front doors remained closed.
The floor shifted under his feet and everything seemed to roll. His hips gyrated in search of equilibration and he grabbed the edge of the workbench.  A mélange of sound crashed in his ears; glass breaking, iron carts colliding, squalls from co-workers.  A deep bass of splintering wood boomed through the din.
Visella!  He last saw her upstairs on his way to MacWhisk’s office.
A fairy wing lay across Simon’s back; his co-worker sprawled over the workbench with outstretched wings. "Are you okay?" Simon asked, but his voice sounded distant and meek.  Louder, "All right?"
Braevarn withdrew his wing and shook his fist.  "Drop ..."
Assuming his benchmate was reminding him to drop the seal channels, he raised his left hand to do so.  
The workbench lurched and propelled both men backwards.
Simon landed on ore pitched from an upturned cart.  The bench tipped over and he yanked his feet clear of the surface.  Parchment, quills, ink, and sorcery sundries spilled in his lap.  Fluid heat drizzled down his back, and he reached across his neck and pressed his shoulder blade: Numb and damp, something sharp.  A jagged rock rolled under his fingertips.
Ceccarny and the baby came to mind.  I’m pregnant, Simon. Braevarn and Visella thought it was so funny.  Visella.  Is she alright?
"My foot."  Braevarn clutched his right ankle where the workbench surface pinched it to the floor.  "Simon, my foot."
Simon rocked forward into a squat and took a duck-step.  He gripped the workbench and tried to lift it, but pain seared his left shoulder.  "It’s too heavy."
"Simon," Braevarn grasped Simon’s right sleeve.  "Drop your spell." 
He nodded and laid his palm across Braevarn’s palsied hand.  "I am -"
Summer heat and the arid plains air snapped with cold and humidity.  The eastern windows shattered inwards and strong gusts spewed broken glass across the factory floor.  Glass and ice glimmered in the air. Frost sprouted over the toppled workbench.  A beaker sundered beside Simon’s foot.
The acidic bite of water seal energy vanished before he dismissed the channel, leaving the fire channel off balance.  His thumbnail dulled with ice crystals, his fingertips blackened.  Where is this ice coming from?
Simon’s left hand stung. The tip of his index finger burned crimson; the imbalanced fire channel blistered frost-bitten flesh.  He dropped the channel by whipping and rotating his wrist, and willing the separation of the energy.
"Ow!"  He slapped his left hand over his stomach, untucked his shirt, and thrust the discolored fingers upwards and against his chest. Don’t be frozen.  Don’t be cooked.  A faint tingle in his fingertips grew into an excruciating sting shooting into his palm.
Simon exposed his hand.  Not too bad. Feels worse than it looks. Over the top of the workbench he spied a balding head.  "Help.  Mister MacWhisk, over here."
MacWhisk bounded to the workbench.  Ice covered his beard and condensation bloomed from his nostrils.  He threw both hands over the workbench and shouted, "Stewart, get the bottom."
Simon pushed the workbench, his shoulder and fingers aching. Together, they raised the workbench enough for Braevarn to pull his crushed foot clear.  "He’s out."
They let the workbench fall to the floor.  Simon’s palms stuck to a metal strike plate on the bench surface and he winced when he peeled them free.  
"Mister Whiskers," Simon let slip a teasing name, "Have you seen Visella?"
The southern wall and floor ruptured.  Terracotta flesh oozed through the splintered wood planks and filled half of the factory. A dull gray eye half Simon’s height glazed over with ice.
"She’s fine," he heard MacWhisk say.
Simon had never seen a sand ray alive or intact.  He couldn’t remember if rays were real or unreal.  Is it dead, or will its frozen flesh rejuvenate? 
MacWhisk ran around the bench and crouched beside Braevarn.  He pointed at Simon’s instruments, "Simon, get your channel kit and help me pick him up." 
 Simon searched through the items thrown from the bench.  He picked up his compass, statlass, and purse and jammed them in his trouser pockets.  Next, he helped MacWhisk stand Braevarn on his good leg.
Braevarn’s teeth chattered. "Who cast the ice spell?"  
"It’s not a spell.  Hurry, you two.  We can’t delay." MacWhisk guided Braevarn towards the entrance.
Simon struggled under Braevarn’s weight to find sure footing on warped wood planks sheeted in ice and littered with glass.  Some co-workers lay motionless on the ground and Simon averted his eyes from the crushed and freezing bodies.
A fairy pinned beneath a cart clutched Simon’s trouser cuff.  "Don’t leave me."
MacWhisk pushed Braevarn and Simon ahead.  "Talvarn? We’ve got to get the real out of here.  You’ll thaw out.  Don’t worry, if the factory collapses, we’ll dig you out."
"I don’t want to be buried."
Hearing a popping noise, Simon looked over his shoulder.  MacWhisk was crouched beside the fairy, cradling its broken neck.
MacWhisk jogged around debris and resumed supporting Braevarn. "We couldn’t help him, he was frozen to the ground. He’ll rejuvenate once he thaws out."
"And the sand ray?" Simon asked.
MacWhisk huffed and helped Braevarn over a fallen beam.  "I don’t know.  It looks frozen through, although I thought rays started dying the moment they left The Waste; apparently this one had no trouble boring so far east."
At the entrance they found the front doors barricaded with ice.  Simon squinted: Layers of ice crisscrossed the seams and hinges, framing unmolested wood planks.  "This has to be a spell. It’s too methodical."
MacWhisk coughed and pounded his chest; phlegm gurgled in his throat.  "Does it matter?"
 "I’ll burn it off." Simon aimed his singed index finger at the hinges.  
MacWhisk slapped his hand down.  "Don’t bother, it’s a shoddy spell.  Kick the right door on three.  One, two -"
Simon lifted his leg and kicked the front door.  The ice cracked and both doors swung open.  Light bathed his face and chest, and he hoped warmth met their departure.
They escorted Braevarn from the factory and MacWhisk led them to a cobbled drive.  Wood wagons lined the semi-circle drive, gates down and strong boxes readied for their payloads. 
Simon’s face, arms, and feet stung, his shoulder throbbed, and his breath condensed.  But it was warmer.
They lowered Braevarn against a wheel, and Simon asked, "Where is everyone else? Where are the drivers and teams?"
Pointing south, Braevarn said, "Look, Simon."
He turned.  Thick veins of ice swelled over the street.  Brick and cobble littered the boulevard along a swath of ruptured earth beginning a block to the west and ending between the water seal and the factory.  The southern half of the factory draped the crater edge. 
Beside the factory, the ten-feet-wide and two-feet-thick water seal protruded through a shattered cement foundation. Effulgent streaks arced from the seal’s inner azure disc, struck the factory and ground, and spirited into the sky.  Rime crystallized wherever the energy struck.
Simon looked around the seal. Tens of people, human and fairy, lay frozen on the street. Seals aren’t supposed to break.
Ceccarny had said she would be shopping for the baby today.  Please, let them be safe. He didn’t believe in the robes’ preachings, and therefore didn’t know to whom he begged his plea.
He took a step towards the factory and spun full circle.  Crowds gathered two blocks to the south, and an empty street to the north.  "Where is Visella? She’s still in there.  We have to go back."
MacWhisk grabbed Simon’s arm and pulled him back.  "Visella is safe.  I sent her to get help.  She flew out the back."
Stars!  She’s safe.  But, how is Ceccarny?  Simon heard wood beams snapping and iron carts clanking.  Stone blocks cracked along the factory roofline.  Daylight shone through the front doors.  Thinking of those trapped inside, he started to run into the factory. Someone has to do something.
  But, MacWhisk held him back. "It’s too late, Simon.  You can’t help them."  He put an arm over Simon’s shoulder and turned him away from the factory.
"What do we do?" Simon asked.  His co-workers and friends: Gone.
His teacher whispered, "I don’t know."
Braevarn asked, "Did you send Visella to alert the royal archivist and sorcery council?"
MacWhisk shook his head and pointed.
An obsidian feminine form glided between buildings.  Beneath the dark fairy, a chalk-white figure ran as fast as she flew. When the runner was a block away, Simon could identify the kind of help MacWhisk had requested. He hoped he hadn’t miscast his lot by following MacWhisk’s controversial teachings; the channel instruments weighed heavy in his pocket.
Braevarn straightened his back. "You asked the undead for help?" 
"However the spells are cast, when the magic breaks you call the people who made it."
"That is not a sanctioned view." Braevarn slapped his palm against the wagon. "The seals are magic. The undead are the enemy of the -"
MacWhisk interrupted, "We need any help we can get."
Visella swooped ahead of the undead and alighted near Simon.  She furled her wings and then stared at the remains of the factory.  "Simon?"
A modicum of relief relaxed the tightness in Simon’s chest.  He put his arm across her wings and gave her a light hug. You’re alive.  She spun, wrapped her arms around his waist and buried her face against his shoulder.  Tears welled in his eyes as the smells of frost-burnt flesh and quaked earth were overpowered by her honey-scented skin.  Her taloned fingers dug into his back and he broke his embrace to take hold of her hands. He felt relaxed and at ease in her embrace, and a worrying thought followed.  I shouldn’t take solace in her touch.  What about Ceccarny?  What about the baby?
Visella raised her tear-streaked face and said, "Look who I found."
Simon turned towards the undead.  A man sprinted behind the skeleton, and Simon released Visella’s hands to wipe his eyes.  Caleb MacKay, his best friend, was back from the dead.
Grabbing a metal brace wrapping Caleb MacKay’s left forearm, Simon embraced his friend. "It’s good to see you."  And, when his frost-burned flesh ached against Caleb’s warm skin, he said, "You’re still alive."
"Aye, Simon," Caleb spoke with a thick Farlands’ brogue.  "It was undead training, not becoming undead."
The undead stopped beside MacWhisk, its two meter frame towering over his diminutive stock, and they conversed in a language Simon did not recognize. Midway through the conversation, he observed MacWhisk’s bearing of focused professionalism turn crestfallen.
MacWhisk switched to the common tongue. "Nobody wants to die like that." 
I’m pregnant, Simon. Ceccarny’s words swirled in his head around the word die.  His legs wouldn’t remain still.  Visella and Caleb wore grave expressions; he guessed they understood the undead’s words.
The undead gazed at Simon through yellow orbs flaming in chalk white sockets, and it articulated words in a metallic vibrato.   "The seal is misaligned. If it is not emulsified, it will vent bands of freezing energy, open random dimensional rifts, and culminate in an annihilating blast."
Across the boulevard, a column of soldiers round-stepped towards the factory, flanked by robed and sashed officials. 
"We have twenty minutes."


Chapter 2


Twenty minutes remained, according to the undead, until calamity struck.  A behemoth sand ray had tunneled beneath the nearby water seal and the magic source faltered. Toppled stone pylons and split wood beams were all that remained of the nearby factory.  Simon Stewart estimated the remaining factories built along the crater precipice would rend into its depths. 
Farlands soldiers and sorcerers stormed the boulevard. Energy snapped at and froze those nearest the seal. Bodies, dulled blue with ice, toppled to the ground.
Caleb MacKay threw a canvas sleeve around Simon’s shoulder, turning him away from the crater.  Sweat stains streaked the fabric; it smelled of dung.
MacWhisk beckoned Visella and Simon to the two meter tall undead.  "This is Serge Clairmont."
MacWhisk talked, but Simon only saw the dying.  Ceccarny’s voice echoed in his head.  I’m pregnant, Simon.  He recalled first meeting her in a dive frequented by factory magicians... 
Bone fingers snapped beside his cheek.  "Listen up."
Simon peeked upwards to find Clairmont focused on the approaching soldiers and officials.
MacWhisk said, "Serge needs our help to fix the seal." He coaxed Simon and Caleb into a huddle with Visella, and spoke spittle and words betwixt the three:
"This is a crisis of magic."
Braevarn scooted away from the wagon and stretched his pastel-dotted translucent wings across the wagon buckboard. "There is time to escape.  Visella and I could fly.  You could -" He flapped a wingtip westwards.  "A dimensional gateway -"
Simon wanted to run, to find Ceccarny, and flee the disaster and possible vilification. Every limb demanded escape, pulling him in different directions.  He shook his head, chest anchoring to the solidarity of his being; the fusion of heart and head.
There was only one right answer, he knew, and he articulated the belief by saying, "We can’t run.  We didn’t create this disaster, and I won’t run away if I can help."
"Seamus," Clairmont said to MacWhisk, "You ought to assist the archivist."
MacWhisk faced the distant sorcerers. "I -"
"If she sees you here, she may conclude you are part of the problem."
He nodded and walked towards the sorcerers.  Over his shoulder he said, "Simon and Visella are capable channelers."
Clairmont stripped a canvas satchel from his shoulder and dropped it to the cobbled drive. He scooted the canvas satchel towards Simon.   "Set this up facing the seal."
Simon nodded, but didn’t move until Visella approached and offered, "I’ll help you."
He squatted and untied the binding cords, fingers trembling when peeling back the worn rustic fabric.  Where are you, Ceccarny?  A maple tripod and beach wood cube, similar to seal survey instruments MacWhisk trained him with, were strapped within.
A squad of soldiers, scabbards clanging against metal thigh bracers, approached the factory driveway.  
"Wait," said one of the guards, and slapped his short sword pommel.
Clairmont stared down the guard who abandoned his sword grip. "He’s waiting.  Don’t interfere."
Simon extracted the tripod, righted it, and Visella and he pulled apart the legs.  Next, he attached the combined compass/statlass to a metal mount, and affixed a sight to the instrument body.  Clairmont’s kit was more elaborate, albeit more aged, than MacWhisk’s.
The undead drew askew his tattered cloak and from his rib cage extracted three rolled sheaves.  The sheaves slipped through his finger bones and landed between Simon’s feet.  Pointing at the rolled sheaves, "I need almanacs B-Three and B-Five." 
Visella crouched beside the sheaves and unrolled them, her gauzy skirt pooled over the datum. 
Clairmont stepped over Simon's shoulder and stood beside the tripod.  He elevated the telescopic arm and crouched, his yellow-flame eye singed the brass eyepiece.  "Do you have a channel kit - Compass and statlass, balm?"
"Yes," Simon answered. Close to Clairmont’s skull, he traced a jagged crack marring the upper left hemisphere.
 "Visella, plot channels to the water seals," Clairmont tapped his boot beside her skirt hem, drug the toe in a broad arc, "In these Middlelands regions.  Simon, grease up and start leads."
Simon nodded, patted his pockets, and removed the two instruments and a square of wax paper.   Squeezing the wax paper, two curds of coagulated dragon fat oozed onto his left palm. He dropped the packet, set the instruments on the ground, and rubbed the balm from his blistered and reddened palms to his wiry wrists.
Visella placed her palms on the parchment.  "That crosses the mountains between the Middlelands and the Westlands."
"Is that a problem?" Clairmont asked.
"I’ll need a pen."
Simon reached into the satchel, withdrew two sticks of charcoal and a rag of fibrous paper, and passed them to Visella.  His greased and ink-stained fingers grazed her wrist, leaving a glassy trail over her obsidian skin.  He picked up his instruments, compass in his right hand, and statlass in his left.  "Whenever you’re ready."  He sighed.  Ceccarny.
"Undead measurements."  Visella scrawled charcoal formula on the paper, making annotations directly to the parchment.  "First coordinates: direction, one hundred eighty mils; distance, one thousand seven hundred ninety one kilometers."
Simon faced north; however, he drew blank on the distance conversion.  "What’s the standard distance?"
"One thousand one hundred thirteen miles."
"Lead time is twenty seconds.  Where’s the nearest Fire Seal?"
Clairmont waved his hand.  "No time to balance the channel. It will be a straight hand-off."
"You are a sorcerer," Braevarn said.
"Hardly.  But, my counterpart is late and I can’t wait."
Metal screeched on metal, a sword tip aimed at Simon.  The other three soldiers did likewise, and the first said, "Hold your spell."  Simon suspected Braevarn’s use of sorcerer clued the guards.
From amidst the crowd of sorcerers, a female voice screamed, "What is going on?"
The soldier called, "They’re spellcasting."
"No," the woman yelled, her arms upraised, red energy lacing her palms.  "They must not interfere."
The soldiers closed around Clairmont and Simon.
 "Stop," A voice echoed across the block.  Similar to Clairmont’s, it rung with hollow refinement.  It was the voice of an ancient undead.
Simon saw an earthy shadow, hazy with substance, loom near the wagon.  Over two-meters tall, the undead slipped from near-invisibility, though not from magic as Simon sensed no open channels, into vision.
The new arrival shouted, "You’re making a mistake."
Light burst from the seal and raw energy flowed into the sky.  Simon’s eyes burned and his sight faded to black.  He dropped to the ground, shielding his face with his forearm.  A moment passed, followed by a gust of wind and boney arms herding him against Caleb. Fabric draped his body.
Terrible cold bled through the shroud of undead cloak.
Caleb spoke, teeth chattering, "What is happening?"
"The seal," Simon said, his condensed breath mingling with his friends.  "Water seals can be used for ice magic."
Caleb shivered against Simon, shaking his arms.  He cast off his metal bracelets. The skin darkened on his thick neck and small lobed ears.  His shorn head glistened with ice.
The cloak parted, ice chips falling from the cloth, and Simon glimpsed Visella and Braevarn, wrapped in their wings, and huddled beside Clairmont’s leg in a similar protective cocoon.
Drake helped Caleb and Simon to their feet.
"Lavrent Drake," Clairmont said. "The dark fairy, Visella, and Simon, are able to assist."
Overhead, a penumbra in the twilight brought on darkness. A group of sorcerers were ensconced in a bubble of orange light, and many more lay dead in the glow.  The four soldiers near the wagon were frozen, literally, or with fear; Simon guessed the latter. 
Disaster inscribed the sky.  A black and amaranthine cloud fractured the air sixty meters above the seal, and unreal monsters swarmed inside the trans-dimensional wound.  
Bone fingers, Clairmont’s, closed on his shoulder.  "Start the channels, and pass them to Drake."
Had pandemonium overtaken the streets elsewhere in the city, Simon expected, but didn’t know.  He listened for frenetic shouting and city-wide wailing, but found serene the surreal wintry night in what hours ago had been a summer afternoon.
Unbridled energy arced across fallen bodies.  A serrated band of plasma gouged cobble ten paces from the wagon, exploding the stones.
Ceccarny’s voice clouded his head.  I can’t marry you.
"Simon!" Visella said.
Simon shielded his face with his forearm and was peppered by debris.  Air rushed past his ears and tugged on his lungs.
You’re not ready to be a parent.  Had Ceccarny spoken those words?
A screech emanated from the seal and his ears rang.  
Drake shook Simon’s shoulder.  "Begin channeling."  Visella repeated the coordinates.
He picked up the instruments, the ceramic statlass painfully cold, extended his hand, and tipped his index finger.  He crooked the finger.  "That’s past the mountains.  What’s the quadrant?"
Visella studied the parchment, lowering her bald head into a cloud of condensation to read the darkened figures.  "A moment" and she whipped her neck back.
Her eyes shone crimson.
Simon had forgotten, unlike other fairies, dark fairies were imbued with infravision.
She said, "The deviation is fourteen mils.  A little under one degree positive."
Simon squinted at a level on the compass stock, making out the bubble.  He straightened and raised his index finger, relaxing the joints.  "Twenty seconds.  Ten.  Three.  One."
Abrasive energy struck his fingertip. Aquamarine filaments of electricity infused his hand, glazing the dragon balm. He grimaced.
Drake, holding a statlass in one hand, touched Simon’s blistering skin with the other.  The channel transferred from Simon’s hand to Drake’s.
Simon set his own statlass in his right hand and shook his left.
"Next quadrant," Clairmont said.  "Almanac B-Four."
Visella leafed through the scattered sheaves, found the quadrant.  Upon figuring the coordinates, she read them to Simon, and set to computing the remaining sets.
Simon started the channels, counting down the lead times, and passing them to Drake the moment the energy hit his skin.  His fingers shook with cold, and from the collected burns and frostbites received that day.  "Last one.  Sixty seconds."
The soldiers cried in terror, and when Simon looked up, Drake said, "Don’t get distracted."
Caesious scales filled the dimensional gateway, and something unreal birthed through the passage into the real world. A dragon appeared sixty meters in the air, its terrific wings churning in electric-lit shade.  Energy lanced the beast’s chest and the dragon loosed a stream of fire across the rooftops.  Oily flame rained from the sky. Shrieks pierced the hellish din.
A second bolt struck the dragon.  It brayed, blowing a flame gust towards the sorcerers.
The dragon thrashed, losing altitude, and flaming beads of oil landed beside Visella.  
She scooped the parchments away from the flame.  "It’s going to burn us!"
"No," Clairmont said, "That’s blood.  Don’t worry, it won’t spray us."
The dragon screamed and plummeted. Flaming liquid dripped from its mouth and cascaded from gaping wounds in its belly. It collapsed and fell atop the seal, seal energy burning through its flesh.
Clairmont peered through the sight and spoke a stream of numbers.  "Simon, do you have the last channel?"
"Yes, yes," and he passed the channel to Drake.
Visella stood and pointed at the dimension. "Look." 
Beasts crowded the gateway.  A flightless horror emerged and fell into the Crater depths.
Drake balled fingers knotted in tendrils of energy.  "There’s too much dispersion from the dragon carcass."
Clairmont sprinted to the seal, calling, "Simon, Visella, follow me.  Caleb, fetch those guards’ swords."
Caleb dashed to the guards to procure their swords.  Simon, trailed by Visella, followed Clairmont, running towards the seal. When he arrived at the looming mass of dragon flesh, Caleb returned and distributed the swords.  The dragon’s body lay as high as Clairmont’s collar, well over Simon’s head. On taking a sword, Simon saw two of the guards lying on the ground, and two doubled over.  
Clairmont climbed atop the dragon.  "Stay there." He raised and lowered both arms between Drake and the seal.  "Simon, sever the head.  Caleb and Visella, cut along this plane."  He pointed at Simon and Caleb.  "Be careful.  The blood is incendiary and poisonous."
Simon ran beside the dragon’s head.  The eyes rolled towards him; the elliptical pupils dilated.  He raised the sword over his head and swung the blade against the elongated neck.  The blade glanced off a boney ridge and sliced an inch of flesh before hitting the cranium.  
"Sorry," he whispered.  He swung again and cut into the fleshy neck.  Blood splattered the ground and sizzled on the blade.  He cut twice more, and jumped back from the draining blood.  The head dropped and rolled over on the ground.
Simon returned beside Visella, and he could no longer see Clairmont.  "Where is he?"
Caleb pointed his sword tip at the dragon, "Doing something with the seal. Simon, help Visella with her side."
Simon nodded.  He swung the blade into the dragon’s flank.
Visella stepped into a spray of blood. "Watch out." 
The blood spattered her tight-fit yellow blouse and cleavage, and, even in the dim light, appeared mercurial on her blackberry torso.  Simon was nauseated by the aroma of her burning honey-scented flesh.
Visella cried aloud, stepped back, and held out her arm. "Keep cutting."
Simon and Caleb cut into the belly.  Intestines and organs spilled onto the ground and the mound of flesh deflated.  He saw Clairmont stand on the opposite side.
"Caleb, a sword."
Caleb weighed the sword in his hand, tossed it.
Clairmont caught the hilt, speared the dragon and cut the flesh between scales.  Then, leaping to the ground, he looked between Drake and the exposed seal, and beckoned the others towards the wagon.  "Clear out."
They retreated, Caleb collecting the swords as they ran; upon arrival, he dropped the weapons beside the guards. 
Simon took Visella’s hand.  Blood seeped from the burn wounds and wicked into her blouse and skirt.  "You’re hurt." 
Her hand palsied and tears swelled in her eyes.  Her voice trembled when she said, "I’ll regenerate. What now?"
Simon faced Drake, glanced to Clairmont; both remained silent. Are they tired, or relieved?  Their skeletal faces betrayed no emotion. 
A moment passed and Drake said, "I’m shutting down the seal."  He performed a manipulation Simon found enigmatic.  Energy coursed through Drake’s hands. It doesn’t burn his bones.
"Finished." Drake splayed his fingers, dropping the channels.
The freezing magic withered, and the dimensional gate vanished, leaving a black cloud roiling to the horizon.  As Simon’s eyes adjusted, darkness grew to a lime ring of twilight encircling the cloud. Dull red embers pulsed within the eviscerated dragon carcass.
Snow fell, blanketing the dead and wounded. He squinted against the dark: The crater, a chasm of ink; Drake and Clairmont beside the seal; Braevarn shivering, cradling his ankle; the soldiers glaring at Caleb; white ground, fire spells popping above the icy laminate. 
Where is Ceccarny?
Boots plodded on snow and ice, Simon heard, from near a heap of dragon-charred sorcerers, and towards him.  MacWhisk led a contingent of soldiers and sorcerers to the drive, outpacing the group.
Simon stepped forward to greet his mentor and found disarming his frosty beard and rosy nose and cheeks.
MacWhisk walked past Simon and said, "They’re looking for answers."
A woman took lead over the approaching soldiers. Simon recognized the archivist, Lara MacIntyre, by her appointments and mannerisms.  A purple sash was knotted over her boyish hips and silver olive branches decorated her lapel. Cropped and ruddy dreadlocks hung firm in their matt.  She moved with hawkish hand-eye-vocal commands. 
MacWhisk took two steps towards the archivist. "This is the undead I told you about."
She waved her hand, tattooed with azure scrolls and lettering, at MacWhisk, and murmured, "Captain."
A short, stocky man pointed at MacWhisk.
"Arrest him."
"Wait," MacWhisk said.  "You said this was only an investigation."
Two soldiers broke ranks and grappled MacWhisk into supplication.  The stocky man shackled MacWhisk’s wrists behind his back.
Simon opened his mouth to protest, felt a painful jab on his back, and snapped it closed.  Caleb pressed his shoulder against Simon’s and shook his head.
Visella drifted away from the archivist.
Gray eyes, and two fingers of MacIntyre’s left hand, looked at and pointed to Drake Clairmont. "Captain, Serge Clairmont and Lavrent Drake are -"
Clairmont stepped aside MacIntyre’s gesture and interjected, "Present by accord, Lara MacIntyre, which you know predate and supersede local law."
MacIntyre paced the wagon length. She pointed at the tripod. "What’s this?"
"Instrumentation," Clairmont said.
Drake approached MacIntyre.  "Is this tertiary investigation apropos? The problem has been resolved."
She said, "This was no accident.  It was an attack. The sand ray was led to tunnel beneath the seal and factory, and the seal was overloaded.  Now, the factory is gone, the seal unusable, hundreds are dead, and more are wounded.
"The perpetrators are among us and must be stopped."
Drake shook his skull. "The attempted correction was worse than any attack."
MacIntyre ignored Drake, waved the captain from responding and said, "Serge, you’re a diplomat, not a sorcerer.  It is our duty to investigate the attack."
She turned away, coupled-fingers pointed, spoke at Visella, "Any recent reports of soul thieves in West Farwing?"
"None," the captain said.
Simon wondered, Has she endured this accusation all of her life?  Being a monster?
She stepped beside Visella and laid tanned and tattooed fingers atop the fairy’s obsidian wrist. Simon knew the archivist tested Visella for magic use.  "You’re not a soul thief?  It’s illegal for dark fairies to use magic.
"Show me your coins."
Visella shook her head once.  "I’m not."  Twice.  "I don’t."  Thrice.  "I left my purse in the factory."
MacIntyre withdrew her hand and approached Braevarn, who pointed at the ruined building.  She studied his fractured ankle, and next faced Caleb and Simon.
Caleb shrugged. "I’m broke."
"Search him," she told the captain, and asked Simon, "Well?"
Simon withdrew his purse, untied the neck, and proffered it. Behind the archivist, he saw a soldier search Caleb, and three soldiers fall to the seal energy.  "I was going to pay the tax -"
She thrust her fingers into the purse, upturned the coins, and withdrew one, dull and scratched, gilded with new taxation leaf.   "Captain?"  She read a serial identifier from the gilding.
"That’s it."  The captain instructed a soldier, "Fetch the inspector.  Tell him we have a match."
Simon widened his eyes, the purse unbalanced in his hand. He held the coins against his sternum. "A match for what? I just received these coins today."
He extended the purse towards MacWhisk.  "Mr. MacWhisk, tell them."
She gestured to MacWhisk, "Take him into custody."  To one of the soldiers, she indicated Simon and said, "Guard him while we await the inspector."
What is happening? Two guards escorted MacWhisk across the boulevard, and Simon called, "Mister MacWhisk." But his mentor didn’t respond.  What was special about the one piece of eight?
"Caleb, I -"
His friend shook his head.  "I don’t know what they’re after."
Four guards remained at the wagon, and one positioned himself between Simon and his departing mentor.
They stood, snow falling on their heads and shoulders, and waited.
"How much trouble is there?" Clairmont asked MacIntyre and nodded at Simon.
MacIntyre gazed at the seal.  "I don’t know.  How bad is that?"
"Bad," Drake said.
The captain returned, and led four royal soldiers adorned with green sashes.  A man, shorter than Simon, stepped front, and drug forward a shackled woman of delicate stature and fine appointments.
A royal soldier tipped a makeshift torch, rags drenched in dragon oil, near the man.  Silver and gold leaf glinted from his palm.  The fire swung to MacIntyre, flame dripping to the snow with a hiss.
Simon turned away from MacIntyre’s smoldering eyes.
She said to Simon, "I don’t fault your aiding the undead.  Too late I understood their concern."
Caleb sniffed, wiped his nose.  "If that’s gratuity, you’re welcome."
Her wrist flicked, and the torchlight swung away, to the man.  "Inspector McKensie."
McKensie grasped for the manacle chain, jerked it, drug the woman towards Simon.
Tears welled in his eyes.  Ceccarny.  Reaching out to her, "You’re safe -"
A soldier brandished a short sword.  "Back!"  
"Well?"  McKensie asked and held up the coin.
Dizziness fomented.  "I don’t -"
McKensie yanked the chain once more, Ceccarny stumbling behind, and he knotted thick fingers into Simon’s shirt.
"I am – beyond – banter."  He pulled Ceccarny abreast.  
Ceccarny stumbled and fell to her hands and knees.  Ice crusted her hemp-bast pantaloons from the knees to mid-ankles.  Bosom, ruddy from exposure, bulged through the décolleté of her sand ray skin corset.
"Careful!"  Simon lurched to her side, reached to draw her into an embrace.
A slap, cold skin and bone, struck his cheek and he fell onto his backside.
McKensie set his boot heel on Simon’s shoulder, kicked him away.  "Get back."  He pointed at Caleb, "And you, keep your hands where I can see them.
Where are the undead? Clairmont busied himself atop the seal.  Simon couldn’t see Drake.
"The ray was baited."  McKensie dropped pieces of eight, Simon had only seen the one in the inspector’s hand, onto Simon’s lap. "Mr. Stewart, the tax gilding identifies you.
"The bait, ambergen urine, was purchased with your untaxed coins by this harlot."
Ambergen?  Fish piss?  Simon shook his head.  "She’s pregnant."
McKensie’s face flushed crimson.  "She was picked up," spittle sprayed Simon’s forehead, screaming the last two words, "Mid-copulation."
What? What kind of ridiculous accusation is that? "That is absurd.  She’s six months pregnant."
"Five months."  Ceccarny’s said.
MacIntyre took the piece of eight, the one McKensie appeared to favor, from his hand and brandished it before Simon.  "She is bound."
"Bound?" Simon mouthed the question. Enslaved with magic, controlled by an object? "Real people can’t be bound."
"I don’t think he knows."  Drake’s voice; Simon recognized the metallic, cagey whisper.
Blue flaming orbs hovered a half meter over and between McKensie’s and MacIntyre’s heads.  Both startled and separated.
The undead placed his palm on Ceccarny’s shoulder and caressed the carpus across her back.  Next, he brushed Ceccarny's hair aside from her ear, exposing a fleshy point.  Flaming eyes peered at Simon, and he whispered, "Ceccarny."
He hooked a finger on the lower edge of her corset and peeled up the boning: A smooth, naval-less stomach. "Does this belly look pregnant?  Have you never seen her nude?"
"I -" Blood rushed into Simon’s face and his cheeks burned.  He shook his head.  "No. And, I never paid her for that."
Drake faced the inspector. "She is a brilliant confidence woman.  Had she been otherwise, I would agree his naiveté too brazen and addlepated to be believable."
He extended a hand to Simon, helped him stand.  "Stunted humerus nubs protruding from the shoulder blade, pointed ears, lack of a naval.  Her name.  –Arny.  Hers is a bright fairy’s name."
A wingless fairy?  There never was a baby!  Never could be.  As realization set in, Simon spun, pointed at Visella and Braevarn.  "You knew!"
That’s why they laughed.
Visella shook her head. "Simon, I’m so sorry."
MacIntyre accused Simon, "That doesn’t explain why you possessed the coin that bound her."
"Today was payday," Visella said.
"Of course it does!"  Caleb again, Simon thought, to his rescue.  "Simon was setup.  He barely escaped.  Right Braevarn?"
"Yes," Braevarn said.  "Someone cast a spell to block the front doors.  Simon and Mr. MacWhisk saved me.  And, it was payday."
Simon swallowed and couldn't bring himself to look at Ceccarny.  "She’s a wingless fairy?"
"It’s possible he was a pawn.  But we’ll want to -"
Clairmont ran, skidded across the snow, and conversed with Drake in the undead tongue.  He fished the parchment from the snow, shook the pages, and passed them to Visella. Picked up the tripod and told Simon to pack it up.
While packing the tripod, Simon thought Clairmont’s tone was fearful, the vibrato and crescendo bubbling the undead’s words when he told Visella, "We need a gateway.  Plot the water seal frequency against the Thrushport fire seal.  Figure ahead five minutes."
Drake passed a device to her.  "Use my chronometer."
"Inspector," said Clairmont, "We need the two humans and dark fairy.
"And, Lara."
McKensie gaped.  "Certainly not. He’s in collusion!"
MacIntyre shook her head.  "I will not -"
"Thrushport will be hit in one hour," Clairmont said. "It’s a systemic attack against sorcery in the Middlelands and Farlands."
He faced MacIntyre. "Local politics and mores do not favor fairies or decayed undead without an official.  Ergo, we need you."
"Thrushport is fifteen hundred miles south." The Inspector glared at Simon, at Ceccarny.
Visella passed a scrap of paper to Clairmont.  "A mile from here.  Near the river.  Twelve minutes."
"You’d risk traveling through a dimension?" MacIntyre asked. 
Clairmont took the scrap and parchment from Visella.  "By dawn, your reagents for water seal energy will be powerless.  This," he waved the sheaves, "Useless.  If the seal in Thrushport fails, your fire reagents will also fail.
McKensie said, "I won’t allow this suspect -"
"Inspector!" MacIntyre then sighed.  "A fool yes.  But, also a pawn."  A nod.  "Alright. What about the harlot?"
"I’ll remain to assist the inspector."  Clairmont plucked Ceccarny to her feet by the manacle chain.  "She’s more dangerous than you think."
"Simon, Visella?" Drake asked.  "Will you help?"
Visella was quick to agree, but, Simon found his lips immobile.  A wingless fairy?  The pregnancy a lie?  Visella and Braevarn, everyone, teasing me all this time?
Set up with a piece of eight that bound Ceccarny: a harlot? 
 "Of course we’ll help," said Caleb, and Simon found himself nodding in agreement.
MacIntyre took the torch from the guard, passed it to Drake.
Drake held the torch in the direction of the river.  "Visella, you know the way."  She struck out across the boulevard, and MacIntyre and he followed.
Simon crouched beside Braevarn and embraced his benchmate. In his peripheral sight, Ceccarny smiled, lips parted, and whispered.  He didn’t understand the words.  Having packed his own instruments alongside the tripod with the undead devices, he picked up the satchel and stood.
"Let’s go," Caleb said in his ear.
Simon followed the torch at a quick step.  Soon after, he was running to keep up, navigating the snow covered bodies.  Soldiers shuffled to block them, but MacIntyre’s presence repelled further encroachment.  On the next block, pristine winter night: ice crystals hanging in fog, snow covering the ground, and a black sky from which snow continued to fall.
Ahead, Visella was a vague outline in the torchlight.  Drake, although tall and bulky with the canvas draping his skeletal frame, looked fuzzy, while, beside him, MacIntyre was a clear and lithe figure.
Running faster into the fog, Caleb now ahead of him, out of sight, he stopped at the river’s edge.  Barges laden with ore were moored to ramshackle piers.  He spun, looking for Drake or Visella, Caleb or MacIntyre, listening for their voices.  Behind him the boulevard was empty.  The only sound was rippling water and Ceccarny’s whisper in his head.  I’m pregnant, Simon.
Blue flame danced across his face and a wiry fist grabbed his blouse.  "You missed the turn.  This way."
Drake guided Simon to an alley where the others waited.  The undead channeled seal energy into the open air, painting the night with a pulsating arc.
"Have you been to another dimension?"
Simon shook his head, and didn’t see anything that he thought might resemble a gateway.  "No, I-"
Mid-sentence, a boney hand pushed him through.  An unsettling sensation swept through his body, and all was blackness.

